PART V: DRAWING

I. LINEAR GEOMETRIC DESIGN DECORATION

  I already have mentioned the fact that the material of
the geometric insets may be applied also to design.
  It is through design that the child may be led to pon-
der on the geometric figures which he has handled, taken
out, combined in numerous ways, and replaced. In do-
ing this he completes an exercise necessitating much use
of the reasoning faculties. Indeed, he reproduces all of
the figures by linear design, learning to handle many in-
struments — the centimeter ruler, the double decimeter,
the square, the protractor, the compass, and the steel pen
used for line ruling. For this work we have included in
the geometric material a large portfolio where, together
with the pages reproducing the figures, there are also some
illustrative sheets with brief explanations of the figures
and containing the relative nomenclature. Aside from
copying designs the child may copy also the explanatory
notes and thus reproduce the whole geometry portfolio.
These explanatory notes are very simple. Here, for ex-
ample, is the one which refers to the square:
  “SQUARE: The side or base is divided into 10 cm. All
the other sides are equal, hence each measures 10 cm.
The square has four equal sides and four equal angles
which are always right angles. The number 4 and the
identity of the sides and angles are the distinguishing
characteristics of the square.”
  The children measure paper and construct the figure
with attention and application that are truly remark-
able. They love to handle the compasses and are very
proud of possessing a pair.
  One child asked her mother for a Christmas gift of
“one last doll and a box of compasses,” as if she were
ending one epoch of her life and beginning another. One
little boy begged his mother to let him accompany her
when she went to buy the compass for him. When they
were in the store the salesman was surprised to find
that so young a child was to use the compass and gave
them a box of the simplest kind. “Not those,” protested
the little fellow; “I want an engineer's compass;” and
he picked out one of the most complicated ones. This
was the very reason why he was so anxious to go with
his mother.
  As the children draw, they learn many particulars con-
cerning the geometric figures: the sides, angles, bases, cen-
ters, median lines, radii, diameters, sectors, segments, diag-
onals, hypotenuses, circumferences, perimeters, etc. They
do not, however, learn all this as so much dry informa-
tion nor do they limit themselves to reproducing the de-
signs in the geometry portfolio. Each child adds to his
own portfolio other designs which he chooses and some-
times originates. The designs reproduced in the port-
folio are drawn on plain white drawing paper with China
inks, but the children's special designs are drawn on
colored paper with different colored inks and with gild-
ings (silver, gold). The children reproduce the geo-
metric figures and then they fill them in with decora-
tions made either with pen or water-colors. These deco-
rations serve especially to emphasize, in a geometric
analysis, the various parts of the figure, such as center,
angles, circumference, medians, diagonals, etc.
  The decorated motif is selected or else invented by the
child himself. He is allowed the same freedom of choice
in his backgrounds as he enjoys for his inks or water-
colors. The observation of nature (flowers and their
different parts — pollen, leaves, a section of some part
observed under the microscope, plant seeds, shells, etc.)
serves to nourish the child's æsthetic imagination. The
children also have access to artistic designs, collections
of photographs reproducing the great masterpieces, and
Haeckel's famous work, Nature's Artistic Forms, all of
which equipment is so interesting and delightful to a
child.
  The children work many, many hours on drawing.
This is the time we seize for reading to them (see above
p. 197) and almost all their history is learned during this
quiet period of copy and simple decoration which is so
conducive to concentration of thought.
  Copying some design, or drawing a decoration which
has been directly inspired by something seen; the choice
of colors to fill in a geometric figure or to bring out, by
small and simple designs, the center or side of the figure;
the mechanical act of mixing a color, of dissolving the
gildings, or of choosing one kind of ink from a series of
different colors; sharpening a pencil, or getting one's
paper in the proper position; determining through tenta-
tive means the required extension of the compass — all
this is a complex operation requiring patience and ex-
actitude. But it does not require great intellectual con-
centration. It is, therefore, a work of application rather
than of inspiration; and the observation of each detail,
in order to reproduce it exactly, clarifies and rests the
mind instead of rousing it to the intense activity de-
manded by the labor of association and creation. The
child is busy with his hands rather than with his mind;
but yet his mind is sufficiently stimulated by this work as
not easily to wander away into the world of dreams.
  These are quiet hours of work in which the children
use only a part of their energies, while the other part is
reaching out after something else; just as a family sits
quietly by the fireside in long winter evenings engaged
in light manual labors requiring little intelligence, watch-
ing the flames with a sense of enjoyment, willing to pass
in this way many peaceful hours, yet feeling that a certain
side of their needs is not satisfied. This is the time
chosen for story telling or for light reading. Similarly
this is the best time for our little children to listen to
reading of all kinds.
  During these hours they listened to the reading of
books like The Betrothed (of Manzoni), psychological
books like Itard's Education of the Savage of Aveyron,
or historical narratives. The children took a deep inter-
est in the reading. Each child may be occupied with his
own design as well as with the facts which he is hearing
described. It seems as though the one occupation fur-
nishes the energy necessary for perfection in the other.
The mechanical attention which the child gives to his de-
sign frees his mind from idle dreaming and renders it
more capable of completely absorbing the reading that
is going on; and the pleasure gained from the reading
which, little by little, penetrates his whole being seems
to give new energy to both hand and eye. His lines be-
come most exact and the colors more delicate.
  When the reading has reached some point of climax
we hear remarks, exclamations, applause or discussions,
which animate and lighten the work without interrupting
it. But there are times when, with one accord, our chil-
dren abandon their drawing so as to act out some hu-
morous selection or to represent an historical fact which
has touched them deeply; or, indeed, as happened dur-
ing the reading of the Savage of Aveyron, their hands
remained almost unconsciously raised in the intensity of
their emotion, while on their faces was an expression of
ecstasy, as if they were witnessing wonderful unheard-
of things. Their actions seemed to interpret the well-
known sentiment: “Never have I seen woman like unto
this.”
  ARTISTIC COMPOSITION WITH THE INSETS: Our geo-
metric insets, which are all definitely related to one an-
other in dimensions and include a series of figures which
can be contained one within the other, lend themselves to
very beautiful combinations. With these the children
make real creations and often follow out their artistic
ideas for days and even weeks. By moving the small
pieces or by combining them in different ways on the
white background, these very insets produce various deco-
rations. The ease with which the child may form de-
signs by arranging the little pieces of iron on a sheet of
paper and then outlining them, and the harmony which
is thus so easily obtained, affords endless delight. Really
wonderful pieces of work are often produced in this way.
  During these periods of creative design, as indeed dur-
ing the periods of drawing from life, the child is deeply
and wholly concentrated. His entire intellect is at work
and no kind of instructive reading would be at all fitting
while he is engaged in drawing or designing of this na-
ture.
  With the insets, as we have said, we have reproduced
some of the classic decorations so greatly admired in the
Italian masterpieces; for instance, those of Giotto in
Florentine Art. When the children try with the insets to
reproduce these classic decorations from photographs they
are led to make most minute observations, which may be
considered a real study of art. They judge the relative
proportions of the various figures in such a way that their
eye learns to appreciate the harmony of the work. And
thus, even in childhood, a fine æsthetic enjoyment begins
to engage their minds on the higher and more noble
planes.

II. FREE-HAND DRAWING— STUDIES FROM LIFE

  All the preceding exercises are “formative” for the
art of drawing. They develop in the child the manual
ability to execute a geometric design and prepare his
eye to appreciate the harmony of proportions between
geometric figures. The countless observations of draw-
ings, the habit of minute examination of natural objects,
constitute so many preparatory drills. We can, however,
say that the whole method, educating the eye and the hand
at the same time and training the child to observe and
execute drawings with intense application, prepares the
mechanical means for design, while the mind, left free to
take its flight and to create, is ready to produce.
  It is by developing the individual that he is prepared
for that wonderful manifestation of the human intelli-
gence, which drawing constitutes. The ability to *see
reality* in form, in color, in proportion, to be master of
the movements of one's own hand — that is what is neces-
sary. Inspiration is an individual thing, and when a
child possesses these formative elements he can give ex-
pression to all he happens to have.
  There can be no “graduated exercises in drawing”
leading up to an artistic creation. That goal can be at-
tained only through the development of mechanical
technique and through the freedom of the spirit. That
is our reason for not teaching drawing directly to the
child. We prepare him indirectly, leaving him free to
the mysterious and divine labor of reproducing things
according to his own feelings. Thus drawing comes to
satisfy a need for expression, as does language; and al-
most every idea may seek expression in drawing. The
effort to perfect such expression is very similar to that
which the child makes when he is spurred on to perfect
his language in order to see his thoughts translated into
reality. This effort is spontaneous; and the real draw-
ing teacher is in the inner life, which of itself develops,
attains refinement, and seeks irresistibly to be born into
external existence in some empirical form. Even the
smallest children try spontaneously to draw outlines of
the objects which they see; but the hideous drawings
which are exhibited in the common schools, as “free draw-
ings” “characteristic” of childhood, are not found
among our children. These horrible daubs so carefully
collected, observed, and catalogued by modern psycholo-
gists as “documents of the infant mind” are nothing but
monstrous expressions of intellectual lawlessness; they
show only that the eye of their child is uneducated, the
hand inert, the mind insensible alike to the beautiful
and to the ugly, blind to the true as well as to the false.
Like most documents collected by psychologists who study
the children of our schools, they reveal not the soul but
the errors of the soul; and these drawings, with their mon-
strous deformities, show simply what the uneducated
human being is like.
  Such things are not “free drawings” by children.
*Free drawings* are possible only when we have a *free child*
who has been left free to grow and perfect himself in
the assimilation of his surroundings and in mechanical
reproduction; and who when left free to create and ex-
press himself actually does create and express himself.
  The sensory and manual preparation for drawing is
nothing more than an alphabet; but without it the child
is an illiterate and cannot express himself. And just as
it is impossible to study the writing of people who cannot
write, so there can be no psychological study of the draw-
ings of children who have been abandoned to spiritual
and muscular chaos. All psychic expressions acquire
value when the inner personality has acquired value by
the development of its formative processes. Until this
fundamental principle has become an absolute acquisi-
tion we can have no idea of the psychology of a child as
regards his creative powers.
  Thus, unless we know how a child should develop in
order to unfold his natural energies, we shall not know
how drawing as a natural expression is developed. The
universal development of the wondrous language of the
hand will come not from a “school of design” but from
a “school of the new man” which will cause this lan-
guage to spring forth spontaneously like water from an
inexhaustible spring. To confer the gift of drawing we
must create an eye that sees, a hand that obeys, a soul
that feels; and in this task the whole life must cooperate.
In this sense life itself is the only preparation for draw-
ing. Once we have lived, the inner spark of vision does
the rest.
  Leave to man then this sublime gesture which transfers
to the canvas the marks of creative divinity. Leave it
free to develop from the very time when the tiny child
takes a piece of chalk and reproduces a simple outline on
the blackboard, when he sees a leaf and makes his first
reproduction of it on the white page. Such a child is in

[Illustrations]
Designs formed by the use of the geometry squares, circles, and equilateral
triangle, modified by free-hand drawing. In the design on the right the
“flower” within the cross is made with compasses; the decorative detail
in the arms of the cross and the circle in the center are free-hand. The
design on the left is similar to a decoration in the Cathedral at Florence,
in the windows round the apse.

[Illustrations]
Decorations formed by the use of the geometry insets. That on the right is
a copy of the design by Giotto shown below the picture of the Madonna
in the Upper Church of St. Francis d'Assisi (Umbria).

search of every possible means of expression, because
no one language is rich enough to give expression to the
gushing life within him. He speaks, he writes, he draws,
he sings like a nightingale warbling in the springtime.

  Let us consider, then, the “elements” which our chil-
dren have acquired in their development with reference
to drawing: they are observers of reality, knowing how to
distinguish the *forms* and *colors* they see there.
  Children are peculiarly sensitive in their appreciation
of color. This sensibility began to grow in the sensory
exercises in the early years. Their hands have been
trained to the most delicate movements and the children
have been masters of them since the days of the “Chil-
dren's House.” When they begin to draw outlines they
copy the most diverse objects — not only flowers but
everything which interests them: vases, columns and even
landscapes. Their attempts are spontaneous; and they
draw both on the blackboard and on paper.
  As regards colors, it should be recalled that while still
in the “Children's House” the children learned to pre-
pare the different shades, mixing them themselves and
making the various blends. This always held their
eager interest. Later the care with which they seek to
get shades corresponding exactly to natural colorings is
something truly remarkable.[1] Over and over again the
children try to mix the most diverse colors, diluting or
saturating them until they have succeeded in reproducing
the desired shade. It is surprising also to see how often
their eye succeeds in appreciating the finest differences

[1] We give to the children first only tubes containing the three fun-
damental colors, red, yellow, and blue; and with these they produce a
large number of shades.

[Photograph]
Making decorative designs with the aid of geometric insets.
(The Washington Montessori School, Washington D. C.)

[Illustrations]
Water-color paintings from nature, showing spontaneous expression re-
sulting from work in natural science.

of color and in reproducing them, with striking ac-
curacy.
  The study of natural science proved to be a great help
in drawing. Once I tried to show some children how
a flower should be dissected, and for this purpose I pro-
vided all the necessary instruments: the botanist's needle,
pincers, thin glass plates, etc., just as is done at the uni-
versity for the experiments in natural science. My only
aim was to see whether the preparations which university
students make for botanical anatomy were in any way
adaptable to the needs of little children. Even at the
time when I studied in the botanical laboratory at the uni-
versity I felt that these exercises in the preparation of
material might be put to such use. Students know how
difficult it is to prepare a stem, a stamen, an epithelium,
for dissection, and how only with difficulty the hand, ac-
customed for years exclusively to writing, adapts itself to
this delicate work. Seeing how skilful our children were
with their little hands I decided to give them a complete
scientific outfit and to test by experiment whether the
child mind and the characteristic manual dexterity shown
by children were not more adapted to such labors than
the mind and hand of a nineteen-year-old student.
  My suspicion proved correct. The children with the
keenest interest dissected a section of the violet with re-
markable accuracy, and they quickly learned to use all the
instruments. But my greatest surprise was to find that
they did not despise or throw away the dissected parts,
as we older students used to do. With great care they
placed them all in attractive order on a piece of white
paper, as if they had in mind some secret purpose. Then
with great joy they began to draw them; and they were
accurate, skilled, tireless, and patient, as they are in
everything else. They began to mix and dilute their
colors to obtain the correct shades. They worked up to
the last minute of the school session, finishing off their
designs in watercolor: the stem and leaves green, the in-

[Illustrations]

dividual petals violet, the stamens — all in a row — yel-
low, and the dissected pistil light green. The following
day a little girl brought me a charmingly vivacious writ-
ten composition, in which she told of her enthusiasm over
the new work, describing even the less noticeable details
of the little violet.
  These two expressions — drawing and composition —
were the spontaneous manifestations of their happy en-
trance into the realms of science.
  Encouraged by this great success, I took some simple
microscopes to school. The children began to observe the
pollen and even some of the membrane coverings of the
flower. By themselves they made some splendid cross-
sections of the stems, which they studied most attentively.
  They “drew everything they saw.” Drawing seemed
to be the natural complement of their observation work.
In this way the children learned to draw and paint
*without a drawing teacher*. They produced works which,
in geometric designs as well as in studies from life, were
considered far above the average drawings of children.
